[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state and louise mentioned
our headlines today the prime minister's
cautious four-part plan to lift the
coronavirus lockdown
it will begin on march the 8th when its
expected schools
in england will be allowed to fully
reopen
but a trip to the hairdresser or a gym
could still be many weeks off
good morning could pubs like this one be
weeks away from welcoming customers to
outdoor space we've been speaking to
non-essential retailers desperate for
news
some of them say every day that they
can't open is a day closer to closing
for good
a memorial service is held in new
zealand to mark the 10th anniversary of
the earthquake in christ
church which left 185 people dead
manchester city win their 18th
consecutive game
they beat arsenal and are now 10 points
clear
at the very top of the premier league
also we're meeting the man who spent
lockdown making the impossible
seem real good morning after a bright
start in eastern areas
rain already in central and western
parts of the country will push east
but leave a fair bit of sunshine behind
and it's going to remain mild
for much of this week i'll have all the
details later in the programme
[Music]
good morning it's monday the 22nd of
february our top story today the prime
minister's four-point plan to ease
lockdown measures in england will be
unveiled today
the first changes will take place on
march the 8th when it's expected schools
in
england will be able to reopen to all
pupils it's also thought that more
outdoor socialising will be allowed next
month
our political correspondent helen cat
has the latest
it's been seven weeks since everyone in
england was told once again to stay at
home
later boris johnson was set out how he
plans to start opening things up again
but he's warned his roadmap will be
cautious that means it's likely it'll be
some time yet before we're back in the
shops the hairdressers or the pub
it's understood the roadmap will be
built around four phases each separated
by several weeks
phase one starts on march the 8th it's
understood
all schools will reopen to all pupils
despite teaching union's concerns
there might be a few days of flexibility
built in but not the sort of phased
return that scotland wales and northern
ireland have chosen
outdoor clubs and activities run by
schools can restart too
allowing friends and family to start
meeting again is also expected in phase
one
so from the 8th of march care home
residents will be allowed to see one
regular visitor indoors it's also
expected that two people will be allowed
to meet in a public outdoor space for a
coffee a chat or a picnic
instead of just for exercise then later
in the first phase on march the 29th
it's understood that groups of six or
two households will be able to meet up
it'll have to be outdoors but it can be
in a private garden
sports like golf tennis and grassroots
football are expected to start again too
it's at this point that it's thought the
instruction to stay at home will finally
be lifted
but staying overnight elsewhere is still
likely to be banned
health leaders have backed caution what
we don't want to see
is that the health services come under
the pressure that we have seen before
so actually what we're suggesting is
that we take baby steps
out of this to ensure that some of the
the
systems and um detail that we're giving
people
are correct remember we came out of this
once before
and absolutely it didn't work very well
for us we actually had to go
into lockdown very soon after but
keeping restrictions
causes economic and social damage for
the many businesses that have been
forced to shut it's understood the
roadmap will set out
a lot more detail on when and how they
can open again
the prime minister will present his
plans to mps this afternoon and then
again in a news conference at seven
o'clock this evening
helen katt pbc news and we'll be talking
about that of course throughout the
morning we'll be speaking to the
vaccine's minister
nadim zahawi at half past seven here on
breakfast
the phased reopening of schools begins
in scotland and wales
today in scotland preschool children and
the first
three years of primary return this
morning while there's also
a part-time return for older students
for essential
in-school practical work only in wales
children aged three to seven will also
go back today as the country's phased
return
gets underway a national memorial
service has been held in new zealand to
mark 10 years since an earthquake
in the city of christchurch 185 people
lost their lives in the quake which had
a magnitude
of 6.2 prime minister jacinda ardern
reminded those affected to take
time for themselves as well as others
today i want to take the opportunity to
say to all those
who may still feel overwhelmed who may
still feel
uncertain sad tired
anxious you survived an event which by
right should not occur in anyone's
lifetime
i hope you find the space to be kind to
yourself
as you've no doubt been to others who
you knew
were carrying the same burden oh well
let's speak right now to our
correspondent phil mercer who joins us
very good morning to you from
from sydney um so phil a really somber
day just tell us a little bit more about
those commemorations
this is a day really of pain and
optimism new zealand and many other
countries remembering that uh awful
tremor that struck at lunch time
on the 22nd of february in christchurch
in 2011
among the dead a five-week-old baby girl
and other very young children there were
british victims among the many
foreign nationals many students died in
the canterbury
television building where two-thirds of
the victims
died that building was poorly built and
no match for this powerful
tremor about half of all buildings in
christchurch
were damaged and 10 years on political
social and community leaders came
together
at the canterbury memorial for those
earthquake victims
to really remember that terrible day and
also to look forward christchurch
is gradually being rebuilt into a
greener
and safer place to live and work and the
prime minister jacinda
ardern taking time out to remember
children
she said children who went through that
awful experience a decade ago
had deep unseen scars and i think the
same could be said
for many many adults as well so new
zealand remembering one of the darkest
days
in its history and also looking forward
to a time when christchurch
will finally be rebuilt and reborn
phil thank you very much for bringing us
up today thank you the us plane maker
boeing has recommended the dozens of its
triple seven airliners be grounded
over an engine fault which sparked an
emergency landing in colorado
it's after an engine on a united
airlines flight carrying 241 people
burst into flames
shortly after takeoff pictures showed
debris from the plane scattered
near houses and other buildings there
was no reports
of any injuries the radio 2 presenter
joe wiley has described
emotional scenes in an update on the
health of her sister whose
ill in hospital with coronavirus francis
who has a rare genetic disorder
can be seen waving there in the hospital
window in a video posted by the
broadcaster yesterday evening
it comes after joe made an impassioned
plea for vulnerable people
with learning disabilities like francis
to be given the covid vaccine
urgently a pensioner from sussex who is
due to celebrate her 111th birthday next
month has been urging others to get
their coveted jab
mae willis who was born two years before
the sink in the titanic
has received her first dose of the
vaccine and says she's looking forward
to
renewing old friendships once the
lockdown is over may says
a long and happy life israel zelter of
no smoking no alcohol
plenty of chocolate 111
is very old i always say it's a time i
went
but i wake up every morning and say
oh you're still here
i've had my gopher jab
and i think everyone should have it
it doesn't cost them anything and it
helps
to stop things spreading
oneself down is over and we can go back
to the things we
love doing i should love to look forward
to go back and see my friends
well let's hope that day comes very soon
next month oh it's not wonderful
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news